EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council (BARC) is mandated to publish and periodic
updating of Fertilizer Recommendation Guide (FRG) at 5-year intervals. Meanwhile, five
FRGs have been published in 1979, 1985, 1989, 1997 and 2005; and the FRG-2012 is the
sixth one. The Guide has been prepared mainly for use by the extension personnel;
nevertheless it would be useful to all levels of stakeholders involved in agricultural
production system.

This Guide has been prepared with the relevant information generated by the National
Agricultural Research System (NARS) institutes since publication of the last Guide (FRG-
2005). Information of soil fertility status of different agro-ecological zones (AEZs) have
been obtained from SRDI, that of fertilizer recommendation for crops from different NARS
institutes & universities. The information of the existing cropping patterns at the farm level
have been provided by the DAE, BARI and BRRI . All these information have been
synthesized to produce the FRG-2012.

The present Guide (FRG-2012) has two parts, text part and fertilizer recommendation part.
The text part covers theoretical aspects of plant nutrition, soil fertility and fertilizer
management, soil organic matter management, land degradation, rationale of fertilizer use,
quality control of fertilizers etc. In the “quality control of fertilizers” qualitative analysis of
fertilizer samples practicable at the farm level using some locally available materials has
been described. The fertilizer recommendation part comprises fertilizer recommendation for
individual crops, cropping pattern based fertilizer recommendation for different AEZs and
fertilizer recommendation for multiple cropping.

With a view to increasing crop production and in compliance with the Govt. policy to attain
self sufficiency in food, fertilizer recommendation in this guide has been targeted to high
yield goal (HYG). A total of 157 recommendations have been made for different cereal,
fibre, pulse, oilseed, root, tuber vegetable, spice, fruit, plantation, flower and fodder crops.
Flowers and fodder crops have been newly added to this Guide because of growing demand
of flowers and expansion of commercial dairy farms in the country. Regarding cropping
patterns, fertilizer recommendation has been made for a total of 294 cropping patterns.
Efforts have been made to cover all the major cropping patterns existing at the farm level in
different AEZs of the country. Besides, fertilizer recommendation has also been made for a
total of 23 multiple croppings commonly practiced in the country.

vill
