6.4 Carbon Sequestration

Carbon sequestration (carbon sink) is a biochemical process by which atmospheric carbon
is absorbed by living organisms including trees, soil microorganisms and crops and
involving the storage of carbon in soils with the potential to reduce atmospheric CO,
levels.

Carbon sequestration is capturing and securely storing CO2 emitted from the global energy
system. A large amount of carbon is stored in soils and vegetation, which is our natural
carbon sink. Increasing carbon fixation through photosynthesis, slowing down or reducing
decomposition of organic matter, and changing land use practices can enhance carbon
uptake in these natural sinks. Terrestrial carbon sequestration is the process through which
carbon dioxide (CO 2) from the atmosphere is absorbed by trees, plants and crops through
photosynthesis, and stored as carbon in biomass (tree trunks, branches, foliage and roots)
and soils. Therefore, a carbon sink occurs when carbon sequestration is greater than
carbon releases over some time period.

Soils of Bangladesh have low reserves of organic carbon due to increasing cropping
intensity, higher rate of organic matter decomposition under sub-tropical humid climate,
low use of organic manure and little or no use of green manure. The highest depletion of
soil carbon has been reported in soils of Meghna river floodplain (35%), followed by
Madhupur Tract (29%), Brahmaputra floodplain (21%), Old Himalayan Piedmont Plain
(18%) and Ganges Floodplain (15%). The sequestration of atmospheric C in the soil and
biomass reduce greenhouse effects. Carbon sequestration is essential to improve soil
quality, increase agronomic productivity and use efficiency of inputs like fertilizers and
water and thus helps maintain or restore the capacity of soil to perform its production and
environmental functions on a sustainable basis.

Carbon sequestration reflects the long-term balance between additions of organic C from
different sources and its losses from soil. Following the adoption of large-scale intensive
cropping, with the introduction of modern varieties and increased use of chemical
fertilizers, the long-term balance would be modified. Intensive cropping encourages
oxidative losses of C due to continued soil disturbance, while it also leads to a large-scale
addition of C to the soil through crop residues. This may result in a build up or depletion
of soil carbon stock.
