The soils have low bearing capacity. The soil contains higher amount of organic matter.
The soils are deeply flooded during rainy season, strongly acidic and have low P, Zn and
Cu availability. Peat soil when dries, it shrinks and cracks making the soils very hard.
When there is mineral top soil above the peat, rice cultivation is practiced.

7.4 Water-Logging of Soils

In Bangladesh, soils are mostly floodplains (80%). Floodplain soils are formed due to
action of four major rivers— the Padma (Ganges), Meghna, Brahmaputra and Jamuna, and
their tributaries & distributions. Flood and inundation are regular seasonal phenomena.

About 2.6 mha area is affected by waterlogging, of which 6.32% covers haor area. It
includes bils, jhils, haors and baors. Some examples of bils are Chalan bil, Gopalganj-
Khulna bil, Arial bil and Bil Dakatia (located in Khulna-Jessore). Jhils are seen in the
southwestern Ganges deltaic parts, for example Bhabadah (touching Avaynagar,
Monirampur and Keshabpur upazilas under Jessore district).

Haors occupy Surma-Kushiyara floodplain and Sylhet basin areas. It extends in Sylhet,
Moulavibazar, Sunamganj, Habiganj, Netrakona, Kishoreganj and Bhahmanbaria districts
(AEZ 21). Some examples of haors are Hakaluki haor, Tangua haor, Kawadighi haor, Hail
Haor and Balai haor.

The major problems related to crop production are strong soil acidity (upon drying), heavy
soil texture, nutrient deficiency and difficult communication. It’s predominantly a single
cropped (Boro rice) area. It suffers from wave erosion and eutrophication. Waterlogging
restricts aeration of the soil creating an oxygen-free environment in the root zone.
Activities of aerobic organisms are ceased and the availability of N, S and Zn is reduced.

Char lands

This area occurs along the major river systems which have a complex topography. Land
instability is a great problem. Other problems include coarse textured soils, low water
holding capacity, low nutrient capacity, river bank erosion and flooding. Crops are often
lost through active changes in river alignment and complete alteration of landscape at a
local level. Char land may emerge either as islands within the river channel or as char
attached to the riverbanks. The active floodplain and char land soils occur in the 11
districts: Kurigram, Lalmonirhat, Sirajganj, Pabna, Jamalpur, Manikganj, Faridpur,
Shariatpur, Madaripur, Chandpur and Bhola. Burial of standing crops and good
agricultural lands pose serious constraints to crop production by fresh sediment of sandy
deposits. Course textured soils, low water holding capacity and low soil fertility are the
major constraints for achieving satisfactory yield.

It is estimated that about 0.72 mha is char lands, however, it may vary depending on the
situation (erosion and accretion).
