5.2 Fertilizer Use in Bangladesh

Inorganic fertilizers have been introduced in this country during early 1950’s as a
supplemental source of plant nutrients. But their use started increasing steadily only from
the mid 1960’s along with the introduction and expansion of modern varieties
accompanied by the development of irrigation facilities. The increasing trend of fertilizer
use, particularly urea-N, still continues (Appendix 1). Until 1980, three primary major
plant nutrients (N, P & K) along with one secondary major nutrient (Ca) were supplied
from fertilizers to our soils. The importance of S and Zn for rice culture in particular was
recognized during early 1980’s. Gypsum, zinc sulphate and zinc oxy-sulphate were then
introduced to supply these nutrients. Very recently, the deficiencies of Mg, B and Mo have
been reported for some soils and crops.

During the past few years, total fertilizer nutrient use in Bangladesh has increased
significantly. Of the total nutrients used in the country, nitrogen alone constitutes about 75
percent, which may lead to nutrient imbalance in soil-plant systems. If this trend of
fertilizer use continues along with intensive cultivation of high yielding crop varieties, the
productivity of our soils is likely to be seriously affected. To avert this potential danger,
the limiting nutrients must be identified and the soils should be enriched with the addition
of these nutrients in properly balanced fertilization programs. Prior to 1990, only TSP was
used by our farmers as a source of P because it was the only P containing fertilizer
available in the market at that time. After 1990, DAP has been made available in the
market as another source of P. It is to be noted that DAP contains N in addition to P.
Therefore, there is a need to adjust for N fertilizer application if DAP is used as a source
of P instead of TSP. A list of commonly used fertilizers in this country with their nutrient
contents is given in Appendix 3.

Fertilizer Use in other Countries

The use of fertilizer nutrients in the Asian region has increased considerably in the recent
years (Appendix-2). Application of fertilizers per unit area is the highest in Korea
followed by China and the lowest in Myanmar. A further increase in fertilizer use needs to
occur in those countries where more production has to be realized from the limited areas
of land.

5.3 Balanced Use of Fertilizers

Fertilizers are applied to soil to enhance the ability of a soil to supply nutrients to plants
adequately as well as proportionately in order to overcome nutrient deficiency and to
ensure higher crop yield. Generally, the farmers of our country are not using balanced
dose of fertilizers. Balanced application of fertilizers has many fold advantages: correction
of inherent soil nutrient deficiencies, restoring soil fertility, avoiding damage to the
environment, increasing crop yields and increasing crop quality.
