If farmers’ existing cropping pattern under irrigated condition is Wheat-T. aus-T. aman
rice, we should calculate balanced fertilizer dose for wheat (4.5+0.45 t/ha), T. Aus
(4.0+0.4 t/ha) and T. Aman rice (5.0+0.5 t/ha) based on soil test value and the procedure
as described in the Appendix 10 of the FRG-2012. In calculating fertilizer dose for a
cropping pattern, rationales (chapter 5.7 of FRG-2012) need to be followed.

9.3 Fertilizer Recommendation for Cropping Patterns in Different AEZs

The most efficient and economic use of chemical fertilizers and organic manure requires
a knowledge about basic data of soil, climate and crops. The soil related data include pH,
texture, organic matter and some other soil properties. The requirement of nutrient for a
particular crop depends on overall environmental conditions as well as on the yield
potential of the crop in question. The more the climate and the soil physical conditions
are favorable for crop growth, the more will be the need for nutrients. High yielding
varieties require more quantities of nutrients than traditional (local) varieties. Utilization
of applied nutrients thus depends on the cropping system, efficiency of crop
management and time and methods of fertilizer application. In fertilizer scheduling for
different crops and cropping patterns, nutrient loss mechanisms and immobilization
process should be kept taken into account.

In AEZ basis fertilizer recommendation, attention has been paid to the information of
cropping patterns and land type. The other important information like soil pH, organic
matter and nutrient content have been furnished in the Chapter 3.1. For all cases, the rabi
crops (with a particular yield goal) have been considered as the first crops in the
patterns. Since fertilizer recommendations are based on soil test values available for
different AEZs, not on the basis of site specific soil test, the suggested fertilizer doses
are not absolute values, rather it is only indicative and subject to variations as arises. The
residual effect of P, K, S, Zn and B should be taken into consideration, as mentioned in
section 5.7 while making fertilizer recommendations for the second and third crops in a
year.
