7.3 Soil Acidification

Acid soils are an important issue because of its adverse effect on soil fertility and crop
productivity. Geomorphologically acid sulphate soils, peat soils, acid basin clays, terrace
soils and hill soils are slightly to strongly acidic in reaction. It is estimated that soils of
0.25 mha lands across the country are very strongly acidic (pH <4.5), 3.70 mha lands are
strongly acidic (pH 4.5-5.5), and 2.74 mha lands are slightly acidic (pH 5.6-6.5). Acid
soils may constraint crop production in more than 30% of lands in this country.

Acid soils possess toxic concentrations of AI", Fe** and Mn”", lower concentrations of P
and low availability of bases which together cause reduction in crop yield. Legumes are
highly affected due to soil acidity. Acidity limits both survival and persistence of nodule
bacteria in soil, and the process of nodulation itself. Soil acidification may intensify and
affect crop production if effective management strategies for amelioration are not
implemented.

Liming is done to raise soil pH and correct soil acidity. Liming eliminates the toxic effect
of Al, Fe and Mn, and increases the availability of P, Mo, Ca and Mg. Liming stimulates
mineralization of organic N and fixation of atmospheric N. It improves soil physical
conditions e.g. soil structure. Liming is generally practiced for dry land crops e.g. maize,
wheat, grain legumes, oil seeds etc. Lime addition would have residual effect on the next
crops for more than 3 years. Liming materials are calcium carbonate (CaCOs3), calcium
oxide (CaO), calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH)2], magnesium carbonate (MgCO3) and dolomite
lime [CaMg(CO3)2]. Dolomite lime is now commonly used in this country. Dolomite lime
is also called dololime.

Liming should be practiced in sols having pH below 5.5. The amount of liming necessary
to neutralize soil acidity depends on the soil pH, organic matter and clay contents. The rate
of dolomite lime application would be 1.0 t/ha.

Acid sulphate soils

The potential of the acid sulphate soils for crop production is severely limited by some
environmental factors like saline tidal flooding, tidal bores and probability of cyclonic
storms. The soil pH is generally below 3.5. Its extent is about 0.23 mha, occurring in
Chittagong, Cox’s Bazar, Khulna and Satkhira. In Chittagong, this soil is known as
“Kosh” Soils. These soils can be utilized for mangrove forest, salt production and shrimp
culture. If protection from tidal flooding through embankment is possible, T. Aman rice
can be cultivated. Deficiency of P and toxicity of Fe and Al are a major constraint for crop
cultivation.

Peat soils

Peat soils occupy about 0.13 mha land. It occurs in the Gopalganj-Khulna Bils (AEZ 14).
Organic materials occupy more than half of the upper 80 cm of the profile. Soft peat and
muck occupy permanently wet basin centers. The area remains wet throughout the year.
