Azolla is a floating fern and it fixes atmospheric N> in symbiosis with Anabaena azollae.

In wet land Boro rice, the average N contribution by Azolla is equivalent to 25-40 kg
N/ha. Azolla should be applied to standing water at the rate of 3-4 t/ha 1-2 weeks after
transplanting of rice. After 2-3 weeks of its application, water needs to be drained out and

Azolla should be buried in the soil. Azolla can be grown and incorporated to the rice field

more than once.

5.7 Rationale of Fertilizer Use

Except nitrogenous fertilizers, all other fertilizers have residual effect on the next crops.

Thus, application of those fertilizers at a full rate is not economical. Considering nutrient

uptake, fertilizer types, and crop and soil characteristics the following points need to be

considered while making fertilizer recommendations for different cropping patterns.

i)

iii)

More than 60% of added nitrogen is lost from the soil through different ways
(denitrification, volatilization and leaching) and the applied nitrogen (e.g. prilled
urea) leaves no residue in soil for use by the next crops. So urea fertilizer should be
applied at a full rate to every crop. The N rate for T. Aman rice could be reduced by
25-30 kg/ha if 12-15 tons green biomass of dhaincha (Sesbania) is incorporated. This
reduction could be 8-10 kg/ha when stover of grain legumes (e.g. mungbean) is
incorporated to soil.

Phosphorus availability is low in acid and calcareous soils. The plant uptake of this
element is usually 15-25% of the added amount, thus it produces residual effect on
the following crops. Hence, the P rate for the second and third crops could be
reduced by 40-50 % for rice and jute, and by 30-40% for maize, vegetables, spices
and pulses under moderately acid to slightly alkaline soil conditions. Such reduction
would be 30-40% for rice and jute, and no reduction for maize, vegetables, spices
and pulses in strongly acid and calcareous soils.

Potassium availability is low in light textured, terrace and piedmont soils. The K
requirement for rice, tuber, jute, sugarcane, fruit and vegetable crops is high.
Response of crops to added K is not clear in many cases. Potasstum application
should be considered as a maintenance dose even at optimum level of soil K.

Potassium application could be reduced by 30-40% in the subsequent crops after
potato, sugarcane, vegetables and spices when recommended dose of K fertilizer is
used. The K dose could be reduced by 20-40% in subsequent crops if 2-4 tons of
crop residues per hectare are incorporated to soils. Since release of K is high in
kharif season due to high temperature, potassium application may be reduced by 10-
15% of the recommended dose.

Sulphur availability is low under wetland condition. So, wetland rice should receive
full dose of S. Cultivation of rabi crops after harvest of T. Aman rice should receive
