vi)

Vii)

viii)

5.8

50% of the recommended S dose except for oil seed, maize and vegetable crops,
which should receive full dose of S.

Magnesium availability is generally low in Piedmont and Tista floodplain soils.
Magnesium fertilizer should be applied to rabi crops and to kharif crops like jute. For
wetland rice cultivation, magnesium application is not needed. If soil is amended
with dolomite to raise pH, further application of Mg is not needed within at least
three years.

Zinc availability is low in calcareous and wetland rice soils. Zinc fertilizers should
be applied to both rabi and kharif crops when grown in calcareous soils (AEZs 10,
11, 12 and 13). For the rice-rice cropping pattern, full dose of Zn should be applied
to the 1 crop and 50% dose to the 2” crop. In non rice-rice cropping pattern (except
maize, potato, vegetable and spice crops) Zn should be applied to the rice crop only.
For growing maize, potato and vegetables Zn needs to be applied to a full dose.

Boron availability is low under dry land condition. Rabi crops should receive boron
at a recommended rate and the subsequent crops in a cycle dose not need further
boron supplement. In the cropping pattern where rabi season is the fallow period
then full recommended dose of boron should be applied to the kharif 1 crop.

If organic manures such as cowdung, poultry manure, bio-slurry and compost are
used, the rates of chemical fertilizers should be adjusted with the amount of nutrients
from manures..

Liming is recommended for soils having pH below 5.5 at the rate of 1.0 t/ha in the
form of dolomite lime at an interval of 3 years. Soil pH should be checked before
every application.

Under rainfed condition, the yield reduction would be 15% for rice and jute, 20% for
potato and sugarcane, and 35% reduction for wheat, oilseed, vegetable and spice
crops, for which all the recommended fertilizer nutrients (N, P, K, S, Mg, Zn and B)
should be reduced by 25% compared to that under irrigated condition.

For an intercropping system, fertilizer dose for the companion crop should be 20-
50% of the recommended dose for the crop depending on the population and the
main crop should receive 100% recommended dose of fertilizers.

Time and Methods of Fertilizer Application

Fertilizer efficiency depends to a great extent on the time and methods of its application.

This is particularly important for nitrogenous fertilizers like urea, which is highly water

soluble and easily lost from soil in various ways. As much as 70% of the applied urea

might be lost from soil in wetland rice culture.

In fertilizer application, the following principles should be taken into account.
