field trials are evaluated in the Fertilizer Technical Sub-Committee meetings, and if found
satisfactory, are forwarded to the National Fertilizer Standardization Committee with
recommendation for approval. The National Committee overviews the results in the
meeting and if the committee is satisfied, the product is then approved through Gazette
Notification. After approval of the product the entrepreneurs, producers and importers
have to take registration for the product for commercial production, import, marketing and
distribution in the country from the Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE) through
certain procedures as stated in the Fertilizer (Management) Regulation, 2007.

8.3 Monitoring of Fertilizers

Regular monitoring of fertilizer marketing and fertilizer inspection is essential to ensure the
availability of standard and quality fertilizers in the market. The DAE is assigned for
monitoring of fertilizers and fertilizer materials in the country. The department is authorized to
take legal actions against any illegal activities related to commercial production, import,
storage, distribution and marking of fertilizers and fertilizer materials in the country. Post
landing inspection of the imported fertilizers and fertilizer materials is done on mandatory
basis at different ports (sea port, air port and land ports) before giving entrance of the products
in the country. There are altogether 11 ports in the country, in which 11 ‘Post Landing
Inspection Committees’ are working. The ‘Post Landing Inspection Committees’ are headed
by the Deputy Directors of DAE of the respective districts. Samples are collected randomly
from the imported fertilizers and fertilizer materials and analyzed in the Government notified
laboratories. The sub-standard and adulterated products, if found in the laboratory analysis, are
prohibited to enter into the country. The DAE also regularly monitors the fertilizers and
fertilizer materials that are being produced, stored, distributed, marketed and used in the
country. The Inspectors of DAE (UAO/AAO/AEOs etc.) remain vigilant throughout the
country round the year, especially during the peak marketing periods. As per the ‘Regulation’,
the Inspectors collect samples, send to the Government notified laboratories for analysis and
take regulatory measures for the sub-standard and adulterated products. The Inspectors can
issue order to stop selling of any fertilizer for a certain period if found doubtful/adulterated.

The Government notified laboratories play a significant role in the quality control of
fertilizers and fertilizer materials in the country. There are seven Government notified
laboratories for fertilizer analysis. The laboratories are Soil Science laboratories of BARI,
BRRI, BINA, Department of Soil, Water and Environment, Dhaka University, Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dhaka University and the laboratories of SRDI
and BSTI. In addition, there are three Government notified laboratories particularly for
analysis of plant growth regulator (PGR). These laboratories are Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology of Dhaka University, Biochemistry laboratory of Khulna University of
Engineering and Technology (KUET) and the laboratory of Bangladesh Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research (BCSIR). As a service laboratory, the laboratories of
SRDI play a major role in analyzing fertilizer samples. On an average, the SRDI analyzes
about 5000 fertilizer samples every year, received from the field levels mainly through
