Fertilizers should not be applied too close to seeds and young roots and stems of
plants

Fertilizers should not be applied to plant leaves when they are young and wet.
Manures and fertilizers should be mixed thoroughly with the soil

Urea should not be applied to soil with standing water.

Manure should be applied 7-10 days before sowing/planting of a crop.

T. Aman rice seedlings should be planted immediately after incorporation of green
manure

For efficient use of fertilizers, an appropriate method of fertilizer application is important.

There are three methods of fertilizer application: broadcast, localized application and

foliar spray. Broadcast method is most commonly used in field crops and the localized

method is widely followed in horticultural crops.

In order to increase the efficiency of fertilizers, the following guidelines need to be

followed.

1)

v1)

vii)

During rabi season, if there is no facility for irrigation, the full dose of urea
should be applied and mixed with the soil during final land preparation. If
irrigation facility is available, urea should be applied in three equal splits- during
final land preparation, rapid vegetative growth stage, and 5-7 days before
primordial initiation.

In case of rice (except B. Aman rice), urea should be applied in three equal splits,
the first split at final land preparation or immediately after seedling
establishment, the second split at rapid tillering stage and the third split at 5-7
days before panicle initiation (PI) stage. In case of broadcast rice culture,
nitrogen fertilizer should be applied in two equal splits- the first split as basal and
the second split at maximum tillering stage.

For vegetable crops, urea should be applied in 2-3 splits over the growth period
of the crop. For short duration crops, the full dose of urea may be applied during
final land preparation.

For spice crops, urea application may be made in 2-3 splits.

The full dose of phosphorus, potassium, sulphur, magnesium, zinc and boron
fertilizers should be applied as basal during final land preparation. Zinc and
phosphorus fertilizers should not be mixed together. In coarse-textured soils, the
potassium fertilizer may be applied in two splits- the one-half at final land
preparation and the rest half at rapid tillering stage. Sulphur and zinc fertilizers
may be topdressed if necessary, especially if the recommended dose of these
fertilizers has not been applied during land preparation.

Topdressing should be done under moist soil condition and mixed thoroughly
with the soil as soon as possible for better utilization.

For tobacco, potassium should be applied as KSO, instead of KCl (MoP).
