7.5 Soil Fertility Depletion

Depletion of soil fertility has arisen due to intensive land use without appropriate soil
management. The situation has become worse in areas where HYV crops are being grown
using low to unbalanced doses of mineral fertilizers, with little or no organic recycling.
Because of increasing cropping intensity and cultivation of modern varieties of crops, the
net removal of plant nutrients is far from the nutrient supply through fertilizers and
manures. It is reported that the overall N balances of Bangladesh soils are negative
depending on the nutrient management and cropping systems, the P balances are near zero
and the K balances are highly negative. High nutrient depletion occurs in soils under
maize cropping.

As the time advances, new nutrient deficiency arises. Six nutrients such as N, P, K, S, Zn
and B are commonly deficient in Bangladesh soils. Zinc deficiency is particularly evident
in calcareous and wetland rice soils. Boron deficiency is common in rabi crops such as
mustard, wheat and chickpea. Magnesium deficiency is reported in Old Himalayan
Piedmont Plain and Tista Floodplain soils. There is sporadic information of Cu, Mo and
Mn deficiencies in crops. Deficiencies of Fe and Cl are not yet found.

Crop production can not be sustained if the nutrients removed during the cropping phase
are not replenished. Fertilizer recommendations should consider short-term as well as
long-term crop response to applied fertilizers. Changes in soil nutrient pools need to be
accounted for evaluating nutrient management strategies by estimating the system level
nutrient use efficiency.

7.6 Heavy Metal Contamination of Soils

Industrial discharge, fertilizers, fossil fuels, sewage sludge and municipal wastes are the
major sources of heavy metal contamination in soils and subsequent uptake by crops.
Industrials wastes and effluents are being discharged randomly on soils, into canals, rivers,
along the road sides or in the vicinity of the industrial areas without any treatment. Lead,
cadmium, arsenic, mercury, chromium and nickel are the significant contaminants.
Hazaribag, Tongi and Konabari are important industrial areas near to Dhaka city. The
rivers around Greater Dhaka City (Buriganga, Lakhya, Balu, Turag) are highly polluted
with heavy metals and organic pollutants. There are huge agricultural lands adjacent to
these industrial areas where polluted river water is being used for irrigation purpose in rice
and vegetable cultivation. Reports are available that significant amounts of cadmium, lead
and nickel are being transferred from soils to vegetable crops (spinach, tomato and
cauliflower) grown in industrially polluted soils of Konabari and Keraniganj. High
concentrations of heavy metals in the water have been reported to reduce fish growth with
elevated levels of heavy metals in the flesh. Phosphate fertilizers might be a good source
of cadmium contamination of soils. Uptake of heavy metals by crops may ultimately enter
into the food chain and may lead to long term health hazards.
