soil. This is called green leaf manure. Green manure adds substantial quantities of organic
matter and nitrogen to soils.

Any herbaceous plant may be used for green manuring, but plants of the leguminosae
family are preferred because of the added advantage of getting fixed nitrogen. The
common GM plants include dhaincha (Sesbania aculeata), African dhaincha (S. rostrata),
sunhemp (Crotalaria juncea), cowpea, mungbean, blackgram etc. The crops should be
ploughed down when the plants are 40-50 days old. Rhizobial inoculation would be useful
to obtain higher biomass in a given period of time over uninoculated legumes. Dhaincha
needs to be incorporated to soil within a week before T. Aman rice planting. A green
manure crop may add 10 - 15 ton biomass (fresh weight) per hectare and 60-120 kg N/ha
to the soil. Azolla (water fern) can also be used as a green manure in Boro rice field.

6.3 Integrated Plant Nutrition System

The basic concept of Integrated Plant Nutrition System (IPNS) is ‘the management of all
available plant nutrient sources, organic and inorganic, to provide optimum and
sustainable crop production conditions within the prevailing farming system”. Therefore
the IPNS approach refers to an appropriate combination of mineral fertilizers, organic
manures, crop residues, composts, N-fixing crops and bio-fertilizers taking into account of
the local ecological conditions, land use systems and the individual farmer’s social and
economic conditions. In the IPNS practice it is important to consider the cropping pattern,
not the single crop. Manure or fertilizer alone can not sustain soil fertility and crop yield
over time, their combination (i.e. IPNS) is essential for sustenance.

The IPNS based fertilizer requirement can be calculated as follows:

A=B-C
Where,
A = Amount of nutrient needed from fertilizer source
B = Total need of a nutrient for a crop on soil test or AEZ basis
C = Amount of nutrient supply from manure application

Example: Nutrient recommendation in kg/ha (AEZ basis) for Potato-T. Aus -T. Aman rice
cropping pattern

AEZ 19: Land type: Medium High Land
Rainfed/Irrigated: Irrigated

Season | Crop ha) N P Kk N) Zn B
Rabi Potato 30 135 30 90 10 2.0 1.5
Kharif-1 | T. Aus rice 4 75 10 20 6 0.6 -
Kharif-2 | T. Aman rice 5 90 10 30 8 1.0 -
