9.2 Use of Upazila Nirdeshika for Making Location Specific Fertilizer
Recommendation

Location specific balanced dose of fertilizer recommendation for different crops using
Upazila Nirdeshika can be made in two different ways. These are —

=> Mapping unit wise average soil test value

= Location specific soil test value

Steps for Making Fertilizer Recommendations Using Upazila Nirdeshika

Methodologies for calculation of balanced doses of fertilizers based on mapping unit or
upazila wise average soil test value are:

1. Identification of land type-wise soil groups

Steps for identification of land type-wise soil groups using Upazila Nirdeshika are
given below:

Step i: Consult upazila soil and land type map.

Step ii: Identify the Union following Union boundary provided in the Soil and
Land Type Map.

Step iii: Identify your plot(s) in the mapping unit(s) present in that particular
union.

Step iv: Note down soil group(s) in each mapping unit consulting upazila Soil
and Land Type Map.

Step v: Identify the land type consulting Annexure-8 of the Upazila Nirdeshika.

Step vi: For confirmation with your identified soil group(s) you may dig out the
soil with the help of a spade or an auger and note down the colour,
texture, consistency, pH and drainage class of the soil.

2. Collect land type and soil group wise average analytical soil test values (results) from
Annexure-2 of the Nirdeshika.

Select suitable crop and cropping pattern of your area/location

4. Calculate appropriate doses of fertilizer for different crops on the basis of average soil
test value and the procedure as described in the Appendix 10 of the FRG-2012.

5. Calculate appropriate doses of fertilizers for different cropping patterns consulting
rationales as described in the chapter 5.7 of the FRG-2012.

6. Methods of fertilizer application for the desired crop are given in the chapter 9.1 of
the FRG-2012.

For example, land type and soil group are identified using Gazipur Sadar Upazila

Nirdeshika. The land type is high land and the soil group is Chandra and the content of
N=0.11%, P = 6.41 ug/g soil, K = 0.15 meq/100g soil, and S = 23.29 ug/g soil.
