FOREWORD

During last couple of decades agricultural production system has been intensified through
improved technological intervention. With the expansion of irrigation and fertilizer,
cropping intensity has increased to about 190 percent. The soil has been over-exploited to
produce more food for the growing population which resulted in soil health deterioration.
This calls for sustainable management of natural resources for achieving food, nutritional,
environmental and livelihood security.

Before 1980s N, P and K fertilizers were commonly used in the country. With the increase of
cropping intensity, deficiency of other nutrients like S, Zn, B and Mg has appeared in the soil
and this has become a common concern with different degrees throughout the country. Thus,
location specific application of these nutrients has become essential for sustainable crop
production, maintenance of soil health and also for reducing production cost.

In the above context and in lieu of the Government policy of achieving higher input efficiency
in the production system, Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council (BARC) has been
updating the Fertilizer Recommendation Guide (FRG) in every five years. In doing so,
research is being conducted at the National Agriculture Research System (NARS) institutes
to generate information on location specific fertilizer recommendation for crops and cropping
patterns across the agro-ecological zones (AEZs) of the country. The BARC in cooperation
with the contributions of NARS institutes, Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE) and
Agricultural Universities updates and publishes the FRG guide. This guide would make the
farmers to be aware of judicious use of fertilizers in crop production.

In the meantime, BARC has published five FRGs since 1979 and the current FRG-2012 is the
sixth one. The FRG has already gained popularity among the users. The Guide is published
mainly for the extension personnel; however it is useful to all concerned stakeholders engaged
in crop production system. I firmly believe that the Guide will play a major role in sustainable
crop production in the country and help attain self sufficiency in food.

I recognize the great contributions of the NARS scientists and extension personnel for
their hard work in producing this useful guide. I also thank the scientists of the Natural
Resources Management (NRM) Division of BARC for their untiring efforts to bring out
this valuable document.

Dr. Wais Kabir
September 2012 Executive Chairman
BARC

ill
