A large variety of organic wastes are available in the country that can be used as potential
manure to improve our soils. These are domestic wastes (non-edible vegetables, food and
fruit parts, after-meal wastes etc.), farmyard wastes (cattle dung and urine, feed/fodder
refuse, harvested crop residues, poultry litter etc.), agro-industrial wastes (sugarcane trash,
oil cakes, bagasse, pressmud, molasses, bone meal, blood meal, fish meal, rice husk,
brans, saw dust etc.), farm wastes (crop residues, weeds, dead animals, water hyacinth
etc.) and city wastes (solid wastes and sewage sludge).

Crops residues

Leftover parts of various crops after harvest are called crop residues. Substantial quantities
of crop residues are produced in the country every year. But little or no care is taken for its
use. In most cases, crop residues are burnt or removed away to clean the land causing huge
loss of this potential resource. Plant roots, straw & stalks and vegetable tops are the
valuable sources of organic matter and plant nutrients. Crop residues can be recycled
either by composting or by way of mulch or by direct incorporation to the soil.

Animal manure

It includes the excreta (dung and urine) of the domestic animals. Stubbles used as bedding
of animals also become part of the manure. In Bangladesh, cowdung is the most common
animal manure, although a big portion of the cowdung produced in the country is used as
fuel. Next to cowdung, poultry manure is a potential source of organic matter.

Fresh animal manure should not be applied to standing crops, because the heat and CO2
generated during vigorous decomposition is harmful for the young roots. Substantial
quantities of animal manure and their nutrient content are lost due to careless handling.
Animal manure should be stored in pits under shade. The cattle urine is rich in nitrogen
and should be preserved with the dung. The manure in the pit should be kept moist in
order to reduce the volatilization of nitrogen. Animal manure generally takes 2-3 months
time for its decomposition.

Compost

The organic fertilizer that is produced by decomposing different waste materials of plant
and animal origin is called compost. Materials that are used to make compost include dead
leaves, straw, weeds, water hyacinth, household wastes like non-edible food, fruit and
vegetable parts, after-meal wastes, municipal garbage, saw dust, wastes of leather factory,
sugar mill bagasse, pressmud, rice husk etc. Municipal and leather wastes should be
treated to make them free from heavy metals and other toxic substances. The materials
should be placed in layers, one above another. Each layer may be 25-30 cm thick. Heaps
should preferably be 1.5 - 2.0 meter wide and less than 1.5 meter in height. In order to
promote microbial activities, thin (4-5 cm) layers of soil or fresh cowdung should be
placed in between the layers of materials in the heap. Top of the heap should be covered
