4. SOIL FERTILITY EVALUATION

When soil does not supply sufficient nutrients for optimum crop productivity, nutrients
must be applied as fertilizer or manure. The proper nutrient rate is determined by knowing
nutrient requirement of the crop and potential nutrient supply of soil. The quantity of
nutrients required by plants depends on many factors like (1) Crops and crop varieties, (ii)
Yield level, (iii) Soil properties, (iv) Environment, and (v) Management. The following
three techniques are commonly used to assess nutrient status of a soil.

e Soil analysis
e Plant analysis
e Diagnosis of nutrient deficiency symptoms

4.1 Soil Analysis

Soil analysis is done to determine the status of total and available forms of a nutrient. For
fertilizer recommendation, soil test is usually carried out to know the status of available
forms for all nutrients, except nitrogen. For nitrogen, total status is important for fertilizer
scheduling. Compared with plant analysis, soil tests determine relative nutrient status
before planting of a crop.

e To provide an index of nutrient availability in soil
e To predict the probability of obtaining a profitable response to fertilizer application
e To provide a basis for development of fertilizer recommendation

e Soil analysis provides a good basis for fertilizer recommendation.

e It indicates fertility condition of a field (low, medium, optimum and high) as to
determine different fertilizers requirement of crops and cropping patterns.

e Soil testing is an advantage over biological methods which are relatively elaborate
and time consuming.

e It is better than nutrient deficiency diagnosis and plant tissue analysis since the
nutrient need can be ascertained before the crop is grown. If nutrient deficiency
appears in plant, sometimes it becomes difficult to correct this deficiency through
fertilizer application.

e Collection of soil samples

e Preparation of soil samples

e Analysis of soil samples

e Interpretation of soil test results

e Recommendation of nutrient rate based on soil test and crop response correlation.
