The Fertilizer Recommendation Guide-2012 is a revised and updated version of the
FRG-2005. This is the sixth Fertilizer Recommendation Guide published by the BARC.
The salient features of this Guide are as follows:

Fertilizer recommendation for different crops based on the soil test values, crop
varieties and high yield goal (HYG)

Fertilizer recommendation for major cropping patterns in different AEZs based on
HYG

Fertilizer recommendation for multiple cropping systems
Clay minerals status of different AEZs

Rationale of fertilizer use

Soil fertility evaluation and assessment of nutrient need
Soil organic matter management

Carbon sequestration

Deep placement of urea

Land degradation (soil erosion, salinization, acidification, soil fertility depletion,
water-logging and heavy metal contamination)

Quality control of fertilizers

1.2 Steps in Using the Fertilizer Recommendation Guide-2012

The Fertilizer Recommendation Guide-2012 has been developed primarily for use by the

extension personnel for advising the farmers to use recommended dose of fertilizers. The

Fertilizer Recommendation Guide focuses on the rationale and principles of fertilizer

application. It is not a blanket recommendation. Thus, the user should carefully read and

follow the Guide. To consult this Guide, the following steps are important.

1.

Read the Guide thoroughly to understand the rationale and principles of fertilizer
application.

Use general fertilizer recommendations for cropping patterns (pages 195-239) for
those areas where site specific soil test values and their interpretations are not
available.

Develop location specific fertilizer recommendations for crops (upland and
wetland) where soil test values are available. Interpret the soil test values into soil
fertility classes, such as very low, low, medium, optimum, high and very high
based on Appendix 9 and Fig. 7.

Prepare fertilizer recommendation for a target yield of a crop based on the tables
given in pages 88-188 and Appendix-10. Develop fertilizer recommendations for
the cropping patterns based on the rationales given in pages 53-54.
