4.5 Diagnosis of Nutrient Deficiency Symptoms

When a plant is deficient of a particular element, some characteristic symptoms appear.
Nutrient deficiency symptom is related to some nutrient function in the plant. A nutrient
may have several functions which makes it difficult to identify the reason for a particular
deficiency symptom. For example, when N is limiting, chlorophyll production and leaf
greenness are reduced, allowing yellow pigments (carotene and xanthophyll) to prevail.
Deficiency symptoms of a nutrient may vary with crop species. Generally, deficiency
symptoms are similar within a plant family since they have similar nutrient requirement.

Nutrient deficiencies are relative and a deficiency of one element implies adequate or
excessive quantities of another. Thus, plants exhibit external symptoms of starvation as a
result of nutrient deficiency or imbalance. For example, Mn deficiency may be induced by
excessive Fe in soils. Plants poorly supplied with P may have lower N needs compared to
those with adequate P. Hence, the same supply of P may become sufficient or deficient
depending on the level of N supply. It is difficult to distinguish among the deficiency
symptoms in the field, because disease, insect, or herbicide damage may resemble certain
micronutrient deficiencies.

Nutrient deficiency symptoms appear when nutrient supply is so low that the plant can not
function properly. In such cases, supplemental nutrients are needed before the symptoms
appear. If the symptom is observed early, it is possible to correct it during the growing
season with foliar spray or top dressing/side dressing. Nutrient deficiency symptoms
appearing during early growth stage may disappear as the growing season progresses
which is especially true for micronutrients.

Recently, leaf color chart has been developed for efficient N management of irrigated rice.
Crop N status is periodically assessed by comparing rice leaf color with four panels of
critical colors in the chart. Farmers would be able to determine the best time of urea
topdressing/sidedressing by using the leaf color chart.
