8. QUALITY CONTROL OF FERTILIZERS

8.1 Fertilizer (Management) Act, 2006 and Fertilizer (Management)
Regulation, 2007

The Government of Bangladesh has promulgated the “Fertilizer (Management) Act,
2006”. The Government has also promulgated a regulation entitled “Fertilizer
(Management) Regulation, 2007” under the Fertilizer (Management) Act, 2006 by a
Gazette Notification (SRO No. 92-Law/2007) in May 2007. Regulatory frameworks for
commercial production, procurement, import, distribution, storage and marketing of
organic and inorganic fertilizers and fertilizer materials have been included in the Act as
well as in the Regulation. Penalties and punishment for illegal activities and violation of
the rules and regulations in import, distribution, storage and marketing of fertilizers have
also been incorporated in the Act.

Heavy/toxic metals in fertilizers are known to deteriorate the quality of fertilizers and may
create health hazards of human beings through food chain. Therefore, quality control of
fertilizers in respect of heavy/toxic metal content is important. Standards for maximum
allowable limits (MAL) of different heavy/toxic metals for both organic and inorganic
fertilizers have been fixed in the country. Maximum allowable limits (MAL) of different
heavy/toxic metals for the inorganic fertilizers and their raw materials have been fixed and
incorporated in the Fertilizer (Management) Regulation, 2007 (Appendix 4). To ensure the
quality of organic fertilizers, standard for physical and chemical properties have been
fixed along with the maximum allowable limits (MAL) of different heavy/toxic metals,
which have been published as Gazette Notification by MoA during April 2008.

8.2 Registration of Fertilizers

The Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE) has been authorized for registration of
fertilizers and fertilizer materials in the country. The entrepreneurs, producers and
importers must have to take registration of their products for commercial production,
import, distribution and marking in the country through certain procedures as described in
the Fertilizer (Management) Act, 2006. The National Fertilizer Standardization
Committee, headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture is the authority for
standardization of fertilizers and fertilizer materials. The National Fertilizer
Standardization Committee performs technical evaluation of fertilizers and fertilizer
materials through a technical sub-committee namely “Fertilizer Technical Sub-
Committee”, in which the Member-Director (NRM), BARC works as the Convenor and
the Additional Director (Implementation), Field Service Wing, DAE as the Member
Secretary.

Technical evaluation of fertilizers and fertilizer materials, applied for standardization, is
done through ‘Lab Analysis’ in the Govt. notified laboratories and ‘Field Trials’ in the
agricultural research institutes (BARI, BRRI, BINA etc.). The results of lab analysis and
