There are wide variations in the nature
and degree of adulteration of NPKS
mixed fertilizers. So it is difficult to
identity adulterated NPKS fertilizer at the
field level.

Good quality NPKS fertilizers are
heavier than the adulterated NPKS
fertilizers.

NPKS mixed fertilizer

If adulteration is done by mixing with soil or gypsum along with black coating, the
material will be broken down into powder by little pressing between two fingers.
The color of outside and inside the granules will not be same or uniform in case of
adulterated fertilizers.

Identification of adulterated Gypsum

Gypsum is used as a source of sulphur in Bangladesh. It comes out as by-product
during production of TSP. Gypsum is amorphous/powder, grey to white in color,
contains 16% S and 20% Ca. Gypsum contains comparatively high moisture and
for that reason it cannot be preserved for a long time in open place. Gypsum
fertilizer is soft and glitters when exposed to sunlight. Usually in rare cases
adulteration is observed in gypsum, because of its lower price compared to other
fertilizers.

To check its quality, pour one teaspoonful
of gypsum into a small beaker or glass or
ceramic pot and add 10-15 drops of dilute
(10%) HCl. If there is effervescence of
CO 2, then undoubtedly the gypsum is
adulterated. Good quality gypsum will
not produce gas or effervescence.

Good quality gypsum is heavier than the
adulterated one.

Good quality Gypsum

Identification of adulterated Zinc Sulphate, heptahydrate (ZnSO4.7H,O)

Zinc sulphate, heptahydrate is crystalline like sugar. It contains 23% Zn and 11%
S. The Government of Bangladesh has also approved granular zinc sulphate,
heptahydrate for marketing and use in Bangladesh.

Good quality zinc sulphate, heptahydrate must be in crystalline form and friable.

To know about the quality, pour one teaspoonful of zinc sulphate, heptahydrate in
100 ml water in a glass container or beaker and stir. The good quality zinc
sulphate will be totally dissolved and no sediment will be found at the bottom
