of the total hilly areas of the country over three districts: Khagrachari, Rangamati and
Bandarban. The major constraints are soil erosion (by heavy downpours in July-August),
inadequate irrigation facility, soil acidity, limited volume of soil for root anchorage,
nutrient leaching and low soil organic matter content. Soil erosion causes due to sloppy
land and jhum cultivation. Jhum cultivation (shifting cultivation) and deforestation are the
predominant forms of land degradation. Soil erosion can be reduced by some practices like
terracing, contour planting and stubble mulching. Steep slopes should better be left under
perennial plants and permanent cover.

7.2 Soil Salinization

Salinization is the most important form of land degradation. The major saline affected
districts are Satkhira, Khulna, Pirojpur, Barguna, Patuakhali, Noakhali and Cox’s Bazar.
This area is relatively flat and suffers inundation by saline water to different degrees.
Other environmental challenges include tidal surge, cyclone, acid sulphate soils (located at
Sundarbans and Chakaria), water-logging in polder areas, river erosion and unstable atolls.

The coastal and offshore areas include tidal, estuarine and meander floodplains. The tidal
floodplain occurs mainly in the south of the Ganges Floodplain (49%) and also on large
parts of Chittagong Coastal Plains (6%). Estuarine Floodplain occupies about 18% of the
coastal area located in greater Noakhali, Barisal, Patuakhali and a smaller area of
Chittagong districts.

Both magnitude and extent of soil salinity are increasing with time. The soils of Jessore,
Magura, Narail, Faridpur, Gopalganj, Barisal, Jhalakhati and Patuakhali have been newly
salinized over 36 years (1973-2009). In 1973 the salinity area was 0.83 mha, in 2000 it
was 1.02 mha and in 2009 it became 1.06 mha.

Saline soils have a high content of soluble salts. In this soil, EC value of saturated extract
is more than 4 dS/m at 25°C, ESP value is less than 15 and the pH value is below 8.5. It is
also called white alkali soils. The soluble salts are mostly chlorides and sulphates of Na,
Ca and Mg.

The agricultural production constraints include soil and water (irrigation) salinity, high
flooding depth in monsoon season, late draining, heavy soil consistency, poor soil fertility
status, high osmotic pressure causing reduction in absorption of water and nutrients, poor
soil structure and cyclonic storm surges. The salinity increases in dry months showing a
peak in March-April and decreases in wet months with the minimum in July-August.
Growing of salt tolerant crops and varieties, improving drainage system, green manuring
and use of mulches could be good options for crop production in this soil.

Climatologically, the coastal belt is most vulnerable and mangrove forests in Bagerhat are
most vulnerable. The critical challenge is to manage coastal resources and to adapt the
production system with the climate change scenario. The major effects due to climate
change are the increased soil and water salinity, inland salinity intrusion, water-logging, loss
of crops, loss of mangrove and fisheries diversity, and disease in crops, fishes and animals.
