Response of a crop to added nutrients depends on soil-crop-climatic variables and
production practices. In general, most of the soils and crops are responsive to N fertilizers.
Upland and rabi crops grown under strongly acidic and alkaline soil conditions are more
responsive to P fertilizers. Oil seed crops and wetland rice are responsive to S fertilizers.
Sugarcane and tuber crops are more responsive to K fertilizers. Crops grown on light
textured soils respond more to K fertilizers. Crops grown on the calcareous and saline soils
respond more to Zn fertilizers. Fertilizer response is more pronounced under irrigated than
under rainfed conditions. Crops and crop varieties may differ markedly in their
requirements of different nutrients. Again, soil moisture content may affect the response of
a crop to fertilizers. Furthermore, fertilizer response of a crop depends on the kinds of
fertilizers used, and also on the time and methods of fertilizer application.

4.4 Plant Analysis

Plant analysis refers to plant tissue test either in the field or in the laboratory. Plant
analysis is based on the relationship between nutrients in a plant and nutrient availability
in the soil. This analysis is done with the following objectives:

e to determine shortage of a nutrient before it shows deficiency symptoms

e to identify hidden hunger or verify the nutrient stress suspected from the visual
deficiency symptom

e to predict the nutrient supplying capacity of a soil

e to study the relationship between plant nutrient status and crop performance

Fresh tissue test directly in the field is important in diagnosing the nutrient needs of
growing plants. The nutrient concentration in the cell sap can be a good indication of
nutrient supply at the time of testing. Tissue tests are rapid and easy to conduct and
interpret. Plant tissue test kits are inexpensive. The result of this testing kit is categorized
into low, medium and high nutrient status. However, application of a nutrient to correct its
deficiency with a tissue test may not be feasible as because (i) the deficiency has already
caused yield loss, (ii) the crop may not respond to the applied nutrient at a specific growth
stage, (ii1) climatic conditions may be unfavourable for the crop to get benefit from
nutrient addition.

Plant analysis in the laboratory is performed on the whole plant or specific plant parts (e.g.
roots, stems, leaves). After sampling, the plant material is dried, ground, and the nutrient
content is determined following wet digestion with concentrated acid or dry ashing in a
high- temperature oven.

Growth stage is important in plant analysis because nutrient status as well as demand vary
with the stage of crop growth. Nutrient concentration in vegetative parts usually decreases
with maturity. In most crops the two best sampling times coincide with peak periods of
dry matter and plant nutrient accumulation. The first peak occurs during the maximum
vegetative growth stage and the second peak during the reproductive stage. Generally, the
