3.3. Clay Minerals Status

Soils of Bangladesh have been formed from different kinds of parent materials and are
spread over three major physiographic units: hills, terraces and floodplains. Clay mineral
data were scarce till 1980s, later sporadically some works have been done. Summarization
of available clay mineralogical data show that mica is the predominant clay mineral in
almost all soils over the country. Other major minerals are smectite (mainly iron-rich high-
charge beidellite), chlorite, vermiculite, kaolinite, and interstratified mica-chlorite, mica-
vermiculite-smectite and kaolinite-smectite. The whole Bangladesh can be divided into
eight units (or suites) namely, Mc-Ch*, Mc-St, Mc-Vt*-Kt, Mc-Ch-Vt*, Mc-Mx-Kt, Kt-
Mc, Mc-Kt-Vt* and Mc-Kt-Vt, where the symbols Mc, Ch, St, Vt, Kt and Mx indicate
mica, chlorite, smectite, vermiculite, kaolinite and mixed-layer minerals, respectively, and
asterisk (*) means partial chloritization of some vermiculite or partial degradation of some
chlorite.

Agroecological zones Major minerals

1. Old Himalayan Piedmont Plain | Mica and Chlorite*

2. Active Tista Floodplain Mica and Chlorite*
3. Tista Meander Floodplain Mica and Chlorite*
4. Karatoya-Bangali Floodplain Mica and Chlorite*
5. Lower Atrai Basin Mica and Chlorite*
6, Lower Euan Siniba Mloadtatatin Mica, Kaolinite, interstratified Mica-

Vermiculite-Smectite and Kaolinite-Smectite

7. Active Brahmaputra-Jamuna . oo. ..
V pu 0 Mica, Vermiculite* and Kaolinite

Floodplain
8. on el ue RESUS Mica, Vermiculite* and Kaolinite
9. Old Brahmaputra Floodplain Mica, Chlorite and Vermiculite*
10. Active Ganges Floodplain Mica and Smectite

11. Low Ganges River Floodplain Mica and Smectite

12. High Ganges River Floodplain Mica and Smectite

13. Ganges Tidal Floodplain Mica and Smectite
14. Gopalgonj-Khulna Bils Mica and Smectite
15. Arial Bil Mica and Smectite
16. Middle Meghna River

. Mica, Chlorite and Vermiculite*
Floodplain

17. Lower Meghna River Floodplain | Mica and Smectite
