with soil. The heap should be kept moist, by spraying water at regular intervals. After 1.5 -
2 months the layers should be reversed in a new heap to allow uniform decomposition.
Depending on the condition of the weather and the type of raw materials used, preparation
of compost takes 3 — 6 months time. High temperature and high humidity favour rapid
decomposition. Addition of small quantities of urea and triple superphosphate hastens the
rotting of raw materials like straw, sugarcane trash, rice husk etc. which decomposes very
slowly.

Trichocompost

Trichoderma can be used for the purpose of rapid composting. Compost materials such as
cowdung, poultry refuge, water hyacinth (chopped), sawdust, household wastes etc. should
be mixed together in a definite proportion and the spore suspension of Trichoderma (e.g.
T. harzianum, count 3 x10'/ml) should be drenched onto the compost materials, and
loaded them in layers in the house, which could be measuring 10 ft. in length, 5 ft. in
width and 4.5 ft. in height. Apart from fertilizer value, Trichocompost can significantly
reduce the incidence of soil-borne diseases and thus helps produce healthy seedlings as
well as healthy crops.

Vermicompost

In composting, earthworms can play a good role. Earthworms can convert organic wastes
such as manure or household refuse to valuable compost. This is known as vermicompost.
Earthworm inhabits organic matter lying on soil surface, eat fallen leaves and other non-
decomposed litters. It has also been found to be especially efficient in breaking down the
toughest organic wastes like sugarcane trash. There are four methods of vermicomposting-
dip pot method, raised pit method, pucca pit method and wooden box method. An ideal
vermicompost contains 1% N, 1% P, 1% K, 18% carbon and 15-25% moisture.

Bio-slurry

Bio-slurry is an anaerobically decomposition product of animal manure. Cowdung and
poultry manure are commercially used in biogas plants. After extraction of biogas (mainly
CHs), bio-slurry comes out of digester. Bio-slurry can be a potential source of organic
matter. Fertilizer value of original manure (cowdung, poultry manure) is not hampered when
it is turned to bio-slurry. Bio-slurry pit should be shaded to protect it from scorching
sunshine and rains. A major limitation of bio-slurry utilization is to carry bio-slurry from the
pit to the distant crop field. However, bio-slurry can be air-dried before use.

Green manure (GM)

Green manure refers to crops that are grown and ploughed down at the appropriate stage
of growth. In some countries, farmers collect fresh leaves from the forests and apply to the
