To know about the quality, pour one teaspoonful of TSP in 100 ml of water in a
beaker or glass and stir them for a few minutes. All the granules of TSP will be
dissolved and a clear solution like green coconut water will be developed. On the
other hand, a hazy/turbid/muddy solution is developed when adulterated TSP is
dissolved in water.

Identification of adulterated Diammonium Phosphate (DAP)

Diammonium phosphate is a widely used chemical fertilizer in the country, which
contains 18% N and 20% total P and 17.8% water soluble P. Diammonium
phosphate is highly soluble in water, having pungent smell and acidic in taste. It is
granular and dark grey to white in color.

A good quality DAP contains 18% N, which absorbs moisture from the
atmosphere. For that reason DAP becomes wet when exposed to air.

Place | to 2 teaspoonful of DAP fertilizer on a dry paper and keep it open for | to 2
hours. If it becomes wet, the fertilizer is of good quality, and if it does not become
wet the DAP is adulterated.

For quality testing, pour one teaspoonful of
DAP fertilizer into 100 ml of water in a beaker
or glass. The good quality DAP will be
dissolved shortly. After dissolution, add half
teaspoonful of barium chloride (BaCl,) into the
solution. In case of good quality DAP, BaCh
will be settled down at the bottom of the beaker
or glass. On the other hand, adulterated DAP
will produce turbid/muddy/hazy precipitate in
the solution due to presence of sulphur. DAP fertilizer

Identification of adulterated Potassium Chloride (Muriate of Potash)

Muriate of Potash (MoP) is one of the most widely used potash fertilizers in
Bangladesh. MoP is light to deep red in colour, crystalline in nature and contains
50% K. Muriate of Potash does not have pungent smell or taste.

To know about the quality, pour half teaspoonful of MoP fertilizer into 100 ml of
water in a beaker or glass and stir for a few minutes. The good quality MoP will be
dissolved totally and almost a clear solution will be produced. But if MoP contains
sand, powder of broken glasses, finely ground white rocks/stones or brick chips,
these materials will not dissolve and will be settled at the bottom of the container
or beaker. This indicates that the fertilizer is adulterated.
