5. FERTILIZER MANAGEMENT

Broadly a fertilizer may be defined as any substance (chemical, organic and microbial)
that is added to soil to supply element(s) required for the nutrition of plants. Specifically,
fertilizers are chemicals that occur naturally or are produced in a factory and when added
to the soil, they supply nutrient elements required for normal plant growth.

5.1 Types of Fertilizer

Inorganic (Mineral) fertilizer: Fertilizer which contains nutrients in the form of
inorganic salts obtained by extraction and/or by physical and/or chemical industrial
processes, e.g. TSP, MoP, Gypsum etc.

Organic fertilizer: Carbonaceous materials mainly of plant and/or animal origin added to the
soil specifically for the nutrition of plants, e.g. cowdung, poultry manure, compost etc. It is
known as manure.

Straight fertilizer: Fertilizer which contains only one primary nutrient (N, P or K), e.g.
Urea, TSP and MoP.

Micronutrient fertilizer: Fertilizer which contains any micronutrient (Zn, B, Fe, Mn, Cu,
Mo or Cl), which is required by plants relatively to smaller amount but essential for plant
growth, e.g. Zinc sulphate, Boric acid, Copper sulphate etc.

Complete fertilizer: Fertilizer which contains all three primary nutrients (N, P and K).

Compound fertilizer: Fertilizer which contains at least two of the plant nutrients (N, P
and K) obtained chemically or by blending or both, e.g. DAP.

Granular fertilizer: Solid material that is formed into a definite sized granule, e.g. USG, UMG.

Coated fertilizer: Granular fertilizer that is coated with a thin layer of different materials
in order to improve the behavior and/or modify the characteristics of the fertilizer, e.g. S
coated urea. Both granular and coated fertilizers are know as slow release fertilizers.

Biofertilizer: Fertilizer that contains an active culture of beneficial microorganism which
benefit the plants by providing nitrogen or phsophorus or rapid mineralization of organic
material, e.g. Rhizobium, Azotobacter, Azospirillum etc.

Liquid fertilizer: Fertilizer that is in suspension or solution, e.g. liquefied ammonia.

Filler material: A substance added to fertilizer materials to provide bulk, prevent caking
or serve some purpose other than providing essential plant nutrients.

Apart from fertilizers, some materials are used in soil as amendments:

Soil conditioner: Material added to soils, the main function of which is to improve their
physical properties and/or chemical properties and/or their biological activity.

Liming material: An inorganic soil conditioner containing one or both of the elements
calcium and magnesium, generally in the form of an oxide, hydroxide, or carbonate,
principally intended to raise the soil pH. Dololime [CaMg(CO3)2] is now commonly used
in Bangladesh.
