6. SOIL ORGANIC MATTER MANAGEMENT

Soil organic matter comes from plant and animal remains. It influences the physical,
chemical and biological properties of soil. It improves soil physical conditions viz. soil
structure, water holding capacity, aeration, soil erosion etc. It is a storehouse of plant
nutrients, chiefly N, P and S. It serves as a food and energy for beneficial organisms viz.
N> fixing bacteria (e.g Rhizobium, Azobtobacter), earthworms.

6.1 Status of Soil Organic Matter in Bangladesh

Soil organic matter is a key factor in maintaining long-term soil fertility since it is the
reservoir of metabolic energy, which drives soil biological processes involved in nutrient
availability. A good agricultural soil should have around 2.0% organic matter, but in
Bangladesh most of the soils have less than 1.5% organic matter, and some soils have even
less than 1% organic matter. Organic matter is known as 'storehouse of plant nutrients’ and
‘life force of a soil’.

As the time advances, organic matter content in soil declines. This is particularly true
under high land and medium high land conditions. The long-term fertilizer trials indicate
that in the rice-rice (anaerobic-anaerobic) cropping system, the soil organic matter has
slightly increased (BRRI and BAU reports) and in the wheat-rice (aerobic-anaerobic)
system the soil organic matter has rather decreased (BARI report). Hence, depletion of soil
organic matter can not be generalized across the country.

Organic matter mineralization

Soil organic matter undergoes mineralization and releases substantial quantities of N, P, S
and smaller amount of micronutrients. Application of organic residues returns mineral
nutrients to the soil. The conversion of organic N, P and S to available forms occurs
through the activity of microorganisms and is influenced by those factors affecting
microbial activity (temperature, moisture, pH etc.). The rate and extent of mineralization
determine crop availability of nutrients from added organic materials. All the bio-forms
use soil as their home or they live on organic matter and decompose it to simple products.
These products are responsible for sustaining soil productivity and performing
environmental regulatory function.

6.2 Management of Soil Organic Matter

Soil organic matter is constantly undergoing changes and needs to be replenished
continuously to maintain soil productivity. The major sources of soil organic matter
include animal manure, farmyard wastes, domestic wastes, industrial wastes, city wastes,
green manure etc.
