PREFACE

Publication and periodic updating of Fertilizer Recommendation Guide (FRG) is a routine
activity of the Natural Resources Management (NRM) Division of Bangladesh Agricultural
Research Council (BARC). The first FRG was published by BARC in 1979 in the name of
“Fertilizer Guide for Major Crops of Bangladesh” mainly based on information of soil units
and field trial results. With the advancement of technology and the progress in soil fertility and
fertilizer management research, the second FRG was published in 1985 with the title of
“Fertilizer Recommendation Guide for most Bangladesh Crops” based on fundamental
principles of fertilizer recommendation on the basis of soil test and crop response.

The subsequent two FRGs were updated and published in 1989 and 1997 using the database
and information of land type, soil fertility, hydrology, agro-climatic parameters and land type-
wise major crops and cropping patterns in different agro ecological zones (AEZs). Later on
the Guide was further updated and published in 2005. The FRG-2005 included information of
crops and cropping patterns, updated soil nutrient status of different AEZs, nutrient balance,
Integrated Plant Nutrition System (IPNS) based soil and fertilizer management, fertilizer
management in multiple cropping system, minimum tillage, hill farming etc. That guide dealt
more with the principles rather than blanket recommendation.

The Fertilizer Recommendation Guide-2012 is a revised and sixth version of FRG. The salient
features of this guide are fertilizer recommendation for different crops & cropping patterns and
multiple cropping targeting high yield goals based on updated soil nutrient status information of
different AEZs. The present Guide includes information of more crops compared to the previous
guides. Flowers and many traditional fruits and spices are new additions. Significant
improvement has also been made with results to inclusion of new topics in the theoretical part
like clay mineralogy, soil fertility evaluation, soil organic matter management, carbon
sequestration, deep placement of urea, land degradation, quality control of fertilizers etc.
Fertilizer recommendations suggested in this guide are not absolute values, rather indicative
since they are based on soil test values of wider areas. The FRG-2012 has been prepared
targeting mainly for extension personnel. However, I strongly believe that the guide would be
useful for all levels of stakeholders in agriculture like farmers, GO and NGO personnel,
scientists, policy makers etc. for production planning and implementation at the local and
national levels.

Contributions of the National Agriculture Research System (NARS) institutes and universities
through providing information for updating the guide are gratefully acknowledged. The
remarkable and untiring assistance rendered by the scientists of the NARS institutes, teachers
of universities and officials of DAE is highly appreciated. Financial assistance of National
Agricultural Technology Project (NATP), Phase-I for updating and printing the guide is
thankfully acknowledged.

I wish to extend cordial thanks to Dr. Md. Abdus Satter, Prof. Dr M. Jahiruddin, Mrs. Sultana
Razia, Dr. S. M. Bokhtiar and Dr. Md. Baktear Hossain in publishing this document.

Dr. A. A. Hassan
September 2012 Member-Director (NRM)
BARC

iV
