2.5 Nutrient Balance

Nutrient Balance is the sum of nutrient inputs minus the sum of nutrient outputs; the
balance may be either positive or negative. Nutrient Balance may also be termed as
Nutrient Budget or Nutrient Audit. Positive balance indicates nutrient accumulation and
negative balance shows nutrient depletion (mining). To achieve sustainability, the quantity
of nutrient inputs and outputs should be equal. Nutrient mining may eventually cause soil
degradation and affect crop production. On the other hand, excess nutrient accumulation
may lead to soil and water pollution.

In calculating nutrient balance, the fertilizer, manure, BNF, deposition (rain),
sedimentation (flood) and irrigation water can be regarded as the nutrient inputs, and the
crop produce, crop residues, leaching, gaseous loss (volatilization and denitrification) and
soil erosion as the nutrient outputs (Fig. 2). The most vital routes for nutrient inputs are
fertilizer and manure, and those for nutrient outputs are crop produce and crop residues.
Hence, the major inputs and outputs can be considered for calculating nutrient balance to
understand partial or apparent nutrient balance. Nutrient balance values vary with
locations, cropping systems and nutrient management practices.

With the advancement of time, nutrient balance is becoming more negative (Fig. 3).
Again, land use with higher cropping intensity may show higher negative balances (Fig. 4).
On the other hand, the addition of organic manure may help reduce negative balances; the
magnitude depends on the types and amount of manure. Any reduction of removal of crop
residues would have positive influence on nutrient balance and this is especially important
for K. Nutrient balance appears to be less negative (Figs. 5 & 6) in Barind areas (AEZs 25,
26 & 27) in comparison with the Brahmaputra, Ganges and Meghna Floodplains (e.g.
AEZs 9, 11, 12, 13 & 17). Incorporation of grain legume residues (e.g. mungbean) can
reduce nutrient depletion to a considerable extent. Thus grain legume based patterns (e.g.
Mustard- Mungbean-T. Aman rice, Wheat- Mungbean-T. Aman rice and Lentil-
Mungbean-T. Aman rice ) are suggested for cultivatation at farm level.

Although the nutrient balance value tells us a little about available nutrient status of a soil, it
has important implications when considering the future long-term total status of a nutrient in
soils. To minimize nutrient depletion, it is not justified to just increase the use of inorganic
fertilizers, rather it is important to increase the use of organic sources of plant nutrients such
as cowdung, poultry manure, compost etc.

Deposition Leaching and
(Rain) “yy gaseous loss
Inorganic |__» Harvested products
Fertilizer SOIL-PLANT [| Crop residues
SYSTEM
Organic _ > Soil erosion
manure T

Irrigation Sedimen- Leaching
Water _ tation

Fig. 2. Nutrient input-output system
