FERTILIZER RECOMMENDATION GUIDE-2012

1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 Development of Fertilizer Recommendation Guide in Bangladesh

Fertilizer Recommendation Guide is an outcome of soil fertility research in Bangladesh. In
1957, a research scheme entitled, “Rapid Soil Fertility Survey and Popularization of the
Use of Fertilizer in East Pakistan” was implemented. According to the soil test values,
fertilizer recommendations for different crops were formulated and published in 1961 for
the first time in the name of “Fertilizer Use in East Pakistan”. During early 1960s, the soils
of Bangladesh were broadly classified into seven tracts based on their origin and
properties. The Then Department of Soil Survey (presently SRDI) carried out
reconnaissance surveys during 1961-70 and classified the soils into 18 General Soil Types
and 20 Soil Units. The second Fertilizer Recommendation Guide entitled, “Soil Fertility
Investigation in East Pakistan”, was published in 1967, and updated recommendations
were published in 1969 in the name of “Studies on Fertilizer and Soils of East Pakistan”.

The FAO/UNDP Fertilizer Demonstration and Distribution Project during 1975-80
conducted a series of on-farm trials and demonstrations across the country with local and
locally improved varieties of crops. The Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council
(BARC) had published the first Fertilizer Recommendation Guide (FRG) in 1979 entitled,
“Fertilizer Guide for Major Crops of Bangladesh”. Eventually with the progress of soil
fertility research, the second Fertilizer Recommendation Guide was published in 1985,
with the title of “Fertilizer Guide for Major Crops of Bangladesh”. This Guide had
provided fundamental principles for fertilizer recommendation on the basis of soil test and
crop response.

After 1985, a good progress has been made in the area of soil fertility and fertilizer
management research. During the period, computerized data base on land type, soil &
hydrology and agro climatic parameters have been developed and subsequently used in
preparing the AEZ map of Bangladesh. Information of soil fertility and land type-wise
major cropping patterns along with crop management practices in different agro-ecological
zones were compiled. The earlier Fertilizer Recommendation Guide was updated and
published in the name of “Fertilizer Recommendation Guide-1989”. Later, with the
advancement of time and research progress, the former Fertilizer Recommendation Guide
was updated and it appeared as “Fertilizer Recommendation Guide-1997”.

Thereafter, the Fertilizer Recommendation Guide was further updated and published as
“Fertilizer Recommendation Guide-2005”. In that Guide some important issues were taken
into account, notably changing cropping patterns and crop varieties, changing soil nutrient
status, IPNS based fertilizer management, and fertilizer management in multiple cropping.

O1
