viii) Micronutrient fertilizers can also be applied as foliar spray since these nutrients
are required by crops relatively in smaller amounts. The sources and solution
concentration of different micronutrients could be as follows:

Micronutrient Source Concentration
(¢/100 litre)

Tron Ferrous sulphate 250-350
Manganese Manganese sulphate 250-500
Zinc Zinc sulphate 250-600
Copper Copper sulphate 250-600
Boron Solubor 250-600
Molybdenum Ammonium molybdate 30-60

ix) For application of Rhizobial fertilizers, procedure described in Chapter 5.6
should be followed.

5.9 Fertilizer Management in Multiple Cropping

Multiple cropping is an important practice to minimize risks and to increase crop
production. The philosophy of multiple cropping is maximizing crop production per unit
area with the minimum soil deterioration. As an approach towards planning of resources,
multiple cropping is a time dimension land use effort within a calendar year through
repeated cropping. It is a labor intensive and highly productive cropping practice which
can lead not only to an increased crop production and greater income but also to a more
equitable distribution of income and an opportunity for diversified agriculture. Small land
holders especially with limited land but high available labor resources can be benefited
from multiple cropping.

For an intercropping system, fertilizer dose for the companion crop should be 20-50% of
the recommended dose for the crop depending on population and the main crop should
receive 100% recommended dose of fertilizers. Examples of fertilizer recommendations
for different mixed and intercropping systems are given in the chapter 9.4 of this Guide.

5.10 Fertilizer Management in Conservation Agriculture

Conservation agriculture (CA) involves the minimum tillage accompanied with crop
residue retention and crop rotations. It’s an emerging practice in Bangladesh.
Conservation agriculture may bring about following changes in relation to fertilizer
management:

e There would be a stratification of nutrients in soils

e Soil organic matter increases due to less decomposition and this would help carbon
sequestration

e Soil moisture retention increases due to residue cover
