surface applied and/or incorporated prilled urea. Saving of 30% N is possible in wetland
rice cultivation by using USG or UMG.

The main benefit of deep placement of N as USG/UMG is that the N loss through NH3
volatilization, denitrification, leaching and surface runoff is significantly minimized. It is
less subjected to algal immobilization and uptake by aquatic weeds than broadcast and/or
incorporated urea. These two factors contribute to the improved nitrogen use efficiency.

5.6 Use of Biofertilizers

Biofertilizers are microbial inoculants consisting of living and active strains of specific
bacteria, algae, fungi, alone or in combination, used for application to seed, soil or
composting areas with the objective of increasing crop productivity. It helps in the
biological nitrogen fixation (BNF), solubilization of insoluble phosphate, stimulating plant
growth or decomposition of organic matter.

Rhizobial biofertilizer/inoculants are made with bacterial strains, reported to fix
atmospheric N> in symbiosis with legumes. They are the members of five bacterial genera:
Rhizobium, Mesorhizobium, Bradyrhizobium, Sinorhizobium and Azorhizobium. The
beneficial effect of these organisms in increasing yield of leguminous crops (lentil,
chickpea, cowpea, mungbean, blackgram, pigeonpea, grasspea, fieldpea, groundnut and
soybean) results from the activity of root nodules which fix atmospheric nitrogen making
available for the plants.

i) Take some amount of seed in a container/bowl.

11) Add sugarcane molasses (2-3% for large seeds viz. groundnut, soybean and 3-5%
for small seeds viz. lentil, mungbean) and mix with seeds to make them sticky.

ii) Add peat based inoculant (2-3% for large seeds and 3-5% for small seeds) to
sticky seeds.

iv) Mix seeds with inoculum until they are coated and appear uniformly black.
v) Dry the coated seeds under shade on a paper. Do not dry in direct sunlight.

vi) There should be a minimum 24-hour gap between seed treatment with fungicide
and seed coating with biofertilizer.

vii) Use double amount of biofertilizer in case of pesticide treated seeds.
vili) Sow the inoculated seeds and cover the seeds with soil immediately.
